(pulsing music)
- [Voiceover] Cereal
production is one of the most
important industries
in the world today.
Cultivation and trade of
maize, rice, and wheat
continue to prosper,
especially now
that modern man seeks
meat alternatives
rich in protein and iron.
Aside from the so-called
"top three cereals",
smaller scale industries
are also presently dedicated
to other ancient
grains such as sorghum.
Pinpointing sorghum's
exact origin
is still under investigation.
But the widely-accepted
account of its emergence
was in Southern Egypt
about 8000 years ago.
Domestication then flourished
in Ethiopia and Sudan
until it spread throughout
the African continent.
During the 1st millennium BC,
sorghum was believed
to have been used
as food for sea voyages,
which explains how
it reached India.
It then travelled further
eastward into Asia
via the Silk Trade Route,
while the African slave
trade in the 19th century
brought sorghum westward
to the Americas.
There are around 30 species
of sorghum known today,
but the two most common are
Sorghum vulgare variety
technicum, or the broomcorn,
and Sorghum bicolor,
or known simply as sorghum.
Sorghum bicolor is the
commercially produced species
and though it is
native to Africa,
many cultivars are already
distributed around the world.
It is an important
food crop in Africa,
Central America, and South Asia.
And it is considered the fifth
most important
cereal in the world.
Before the 1940s, wild
varieties of sorghum
grew up to seven feet tall,
and posed harvesting setbacks.
But sorghum has two or
three dwarfing genes in it,
which researchers capitalized on
to create varieties that are
only two to four feet tall.
Sorghum roots spread
deep and wide.
It has a lateral distribution
of up to one meter
and a depth of up to two meters.
It has a long, narrow,
pointed leaf blade
and average number of leaves
ranges from eight to 22.
The stem of the sorghum plant
is long, solid, and sweet,
with a diameter ranging between
three and five millimeters.
It has internodes
which are coated
with a thick and waxy layer,
which increases its
tolerance to drought.
The panicle of
sorghum is compact,
and contains 800
to 3000 kernels.
Kernel or grain colors
vary between black,
red, brown, or tan.
Planting sorghum is not
as demanding as maize.
It's a warm weather
crop which needs
at least 90 degrees Fahrenheit
for it to perform
maximum photosynthesis.
Though sorghum and maize
share similar morphology,
they however differ in
planting requirements.
For example, unlike
maize, sorghum can thrive
in poor, sandy soil,
as well as in low
potential, shallow soil
with high clay content.
Also an average rainfall range
of 300 to 750mm
is all what sorghum
needs to grow,
which is not enough for maize.
Sorghum is classified
according to
its purpose or
application, namely,
grain sorghum for
human consumption,
sweet sorghum for sweeteners
and lately for
ethanol production,
broom sorghum for brooms,
and grass sorghum for
forage and silage use.
It is called a
nature-cared crop,
because it doesn't require
too much fertilizer,
irrigation, and pesticide.
It actually has an organic
chemical compound called
sorgoleone which it
uses to fight weeds.
Sorghum may not be a
superstar like maize or rice
but its undemanding nature
and ability to withstand
environments that are too
harsh for other cereals
can make it a favorite
among farmers in the future.
The craze over whole
foods and whole grains
has put ancient grains in
the spotlight recently.
Some of them however often
undergo refining processes
to remove husks and
make them edible.
Of course it's a known
fact that this refinement
strips off not just husks,
but nutrients as well.
It's a different
story with sorghum.
It has a husk, but
unlike other grains,
this husk is edible
so it can be consumed
with its outer layers along
with its untouched nutrients.
Plus, sorghum is gluten free.
Wheat may be higher
in fiber and protein,
but sorghum's nutrient values
do not trail far behind.
Here's what 100g of
sorghum can give.
330 kilocalories of energy,
11.3g of protein,
74.63g of carbohydrates,
and 6.3g of fiber.
Even in mineral content,
sorghum is competitive.
It has 28mg of calcium,
4.4mg of iron,
190mg of magnesium,
287mg of phosphorus,
350mg of potassium,
6mg of sodium,
1.54mg of zinc,
1.08mg of copper,
and 1.63mg of manganese.
Sorghum actually defeats
the top three cereals
in iron content.
Maize only has 2.71mg,
rice has a measly 0.8,
while wheat has 3.19mg.
Iron's main role in the
body is in the production
of hemoglobin in
red blood cells.
Hemoglobin's task is
to transport oxygen
from the lungs
throughout the body,
which is why insufficient levels
may lead to decreased brain
function and immunity.
A person with iron
deficiency often experiences
chronic fatigue and exhaustion.
Men do not need the same
amount of iron as women.
As a matter of fact, two
servings of 100g of sorghum
in a day can already
provide the daily
dietary requirement of
8mg for adult males.
Here is sorghum's
vitamin profile.
Thiamin at 0.23mg,
riboflavin at 0.14mg,
niacin at 2.9mg,
pantothenic acid at 1.25mg,
vitamin B6 at 0.59mg,
folate at 20mg,
and vitamin E at 0.81mg.
Sorghum is also a good source
of an essential amino
acid called leucine.
Based on cellular studies,
leucine is responsible
for activating a compound
in the muscles called
MTOR,
or mammalian target
of rapamycin.
MTOR serves as a switch
that tells the muscles
when to start or stop
protein manufacturing.
So an ample amount of leucine
properly regulates
protein synthesis.
And since the body cannot
produce leucine on its own,
sorghum can be a dietary source.
One property of sorghum
that sets it apart
from the other grains
are the compounds called
policosanols found in the
wax coating of the grain.
According to research,
policosanol improves
the body's blood lipid profile.
In a study published in
the American Heart Journal
in February 2002,
a 10mg daily dosage
of policosanol can
decrease levels of LDL,
or bad cholesterol, by 29%,
and increase HDL,
or good cholesterol,
by up to 15%.
Studies have also
shown that policosanol
can reduce risks of
cardiovascular disease
such as atherosclerosis,
LDL oxidation,
and platelet aggregation.
It has blood thinning
capabilities, like Aspirin.
With a competitive
nutritional profile,
gluten-free characteristic,
and unique policosanol content,
sorghum definitely needs
the credit it deserves
in the advancement of
human diet and nutrition.
Even though sorghum has been
around for thousands of years,
its significance
is largely attached
to the African
culture and people.
Sorghum is used to make
alcoholic beverages
such as the African
sorghum beer.
It's a brownish-pink beer
with a fruity and sour taste,
and alcohol content between
one and eight percent.
Many find this to be
quench satisfying.
But this beer has a bigger
relevance and significance
among the Black
African communities.
In Durban, South Africa
in the earlier part
of the 20th century,
a segregation rule
was implemented called
the Durban System.
Housed in accommodations on
the outskirts of urban areas,
Black Africans could
maintain employment
but required a permit
to enter the city.
In Northern Sotho in Africa
sorghum beer is called "bjala"
and is used to
mark the unveiling
of a loved one's tombstone.
The women usually
perform this task,
which requires days to complete.
They first boil sorghum in water
using huge iron pots
and over large bonfires.
They let the mixture
ferment for several days
before finally
straining the mixture
to extract the beer
for the ceremony.
Sorghum beer is called by
different names such as
"burukutu" in Nigera,
"pombe" in East Africa,
and "bil-bil" in Cameroon.
A sorghum field and distillery
was also the main
backdrop and landscape
for the 1987
Oscar-nominated Chinese film
titled "Red Sorghum",
based on the novel
"Red Sorghum Clan"
by Nobel Laureate Mo Yan.
Stretches of red sorghum
fields, like a sea of blood,
was the perfect visualization
of a culture entrenched
in brutality and cruelty
way before the onset
of World War II.
It won the Golden Bear Award
at the Berlin International
Film Festival in 1988.
On a lighter note, the
variety Sorghum vulgare,
or broomcorn, can
be said to have
enormously contributed to
house cleaning and keeping.
Benjamin Franklin is
recognized to have introduced
broomcorn to the United
States in the early 1700s.
But it was in 1797 when a
farmer from Massachusetts
named Levi Dickinson made
a broom out of sorghum
as a gift for his wife.
Because of the sorghum
broom's good performance,
Dickinson began
producing and selling
sorghum straw brooms
in his neighborhood.
By 1834 the broom
industry took flight,
and broom shops began
to open one by one.
Today sorghum broomcorn is
used as a plant ornament
and decorative wreaths,
perfect during the fall
and autumn seasons.
Sorghum is now slowly getting
recognized by many countries,
so it's not too late for
this grain to make history
and gain more cultural relevance
and significance in the future.
Sorghum is not called the
fifth most important cereal
in the world with no
figures to back it up.
It is planted and grown in
at least three continents.
Africa,
Asia,
and Northern America.
Based on statistics
from the United Nations
Food and Agriculture
Organization,
these are the top five sorghum
producers in the year 2012.
Number one, Nigeria with
6,900,000 metric tons.
Two, the United States with
6,272,360
metric tons.
Number three, India with
6,010,000 metric tons.
Four, Argentina with
4,252,310 metric tons.
And number five, Ethiopia with
3,604,262
metric tons.
Also in the top 10
are Burkina Faso,
Niger, Chad, China, and Mali.
Sorghum continues
to play a huge part
in human food
consumption as well as
in animal and livestock
feeding around the world.
But a new use was recently
found for sorghum,
particularly the
sweet sorghum variety.
Ethanol production.
In 2007 a collaborative project
by the International
Crops Research Institute
for the Semi-Arid
Tropics, or ICRISAT,
and some private institutions.
The first sorghum
bioethanol plant
became operational in
India and since then,
produced over 10,000
gallons of ethanol daily.
Converting sorghum
into ethanol requires
crushing the stalks to
extract sweet juices,
and then fermenting and
distilling this sweet extract
into a high-octane,
clean burning biofuel.
Only the stalks of sorghum are
used in ethanol production,
leaving the grains
available for food use
and human consumption.
The crushed stalks are then
used for animal fodder.
It is for this reason
why sorghum is called
an ideal smart crop,
because one sorghum plant
can be used as food,
fodder, and biofuel
at the same time.
One reason why
pushing sweet sorghum
for ethanol production is
ideal is because of its cost.
Producing a gallon of
ethanol from sweet sorghum
only costs $1.74,
compared to $2.19
from sugar cane
and $2.12 from maize.
Also since sorghum can
thrive in low fertile soils,
forests and other
productive crop land
are not sacrificed for
ethanol production.
Today numerous projects
focused on producing
renewable energy
from sweet sorghum
are on their way in
countries such as
Australia, Portugal,
the United States,
Ghana, Brazil, France,
Taiwan, Thailand, and Canada.
China is the ninth major
producer of sorghum,
but in 2013 it imported over
60,000 metric tons of sorghum
from the United States
for animal feed.
It turned out that China's
large private feed mills
already exhausted their
import allocations for corn,
so their second best choice
for animal feed is sorghum.
Since domestic corn production
in China is expensive,
importing sorghum from the
US for alcohol production
and animal feed is a
more cost-efficient move
for the government,
and by extension,
good news to sorghum
farmers in the US.
Continuous research on
sorghum is still conducted,
especially on developing
a commercialized hybrid
that is more tolerant
of colder temperatures.
A cold-tolerant variety can
expand sorghum's agronomics
and increase total yield,
resulting in an alternative,
viable, and sustainable
source of food,
fodder, and ethanol
other than maize.
Sorghum has been a staple grain
for many ethnicities in
the African continent,
so there's no reason
why this ancient grain
should not find its
way to dinner tables
of other cultures and countries.
Sorghum flour is often
used as a substitute
for wheat flour in baked goods.
Many can easily get
accustomed to it
due to its natural sweetness.
However, since sorghum
is gluten free,
binders such as sap
and gum or cornstarch
is needed to give
baked goods stretch.
Here is a cookie recipe
using sorghum flour.
You'll need
three quarters of a
cup of sorghum flour,
one half cup of tapioca flour,
a quarter cup of potato starch,
one teaspoon of xanthan gum,
one half teaspoon
of baking soda,
one quarter teaspoon of salt,
a quarter cup of margarine,
three quarters cup
of brown sugar,
one third cup of
granulated sugar,
two teaspoons of
vanilla extract,
one extra large egg,
one cup of chocolate chips,
and a quarter cup
of chopped nuts.
Preheat oven to 350
degrees Fahrenheit,
or 180 degrees Celsius
and grease a large baking sheet.
In a bowl mix all the
flours, baking soda,
xanthan gum, and salt.
Let it sit for awhile.
In a large bowl beat
margarine, brown sugar,
white sugar, vanilla
extract, and egg
until light and fluffy.
While on low speed, gradually
beat in the flour mixture
until everything
is incorporated.
Then fold in the
chocolate chips and nuts.
Scoop one tablespoon
full of dough
and drop on the baking sheet.
Repeat the process until
all dough is used up.
Make sure dough balls are
at least two inches apart.
Bake for 10 to 12
minutes and cool
before removing from
the baking sheet.
Here's another sweet
sorghum dessert,
baked apples with sorghum syrup.
Prepare the following.
Two medium apples,
one cup apple cider,
the zest of one lemon,
one half teaspoon
of brown cinnamon,
two tablespoons softened butter,
one tablespoon chopped pecans,
two tablespoons rolled oats,
one tablespoon raisins,
four tablespoons sorghum syrup,
one fourth cup heavy cream,
and a pinch of cinnamon.
Preheat oven to 375
degrees Fahrenheit.
Core the apples.
In a small baking dish,
pour the apple cider.
In a small bowl
combine the lemon zest,
ground cinnamon, butter, pecans,
rolled oats, raisins,
and three tablespoons
sorghum syrup.
Combine well, then spoon
the mixture into each apple.
Place the apples in the
baking dish with the cider.
Cover with foil and
bake for 30 minutes.
Afterwards, remove foil
and return to the oven
for another 10 minutes or
until apples are tender.
Prepare the cream by
whipping the chilled cream,
cinnamon, and one
tablespoon sorghum syrup
in a small bowl
until peaks form.
Remove the apples from the oven
and immediately scoop the
cold cream over each apple.
Drizzle some of the juices
from the baking dish on top.
With sorghum's
natural sweetness,
it can be easily incorporated
into numerous dishes
as a sweetener and
even as a marinade.
This is the grain for
anyone with a penchant
for a sweet treat
and a sweet life.
(pulsing music)